# EPO_Seurat_Monocle2
Wakhloo et al. - Nature Communications code for scRNAseq analysis in Seurat and trajectory analysis in Monocle2

The code to analyze and reproduce the results of the scRNAseq trajectory analysis (Monocle2) shown in Figure 2 in the manuscript.

ABSTRACT

Erythropoietin (EPO), named after its role in hematopoiesis, is also expressed in the mammalian brain. In clinical settings, recombinant EPO had revealed a remarkable improvement of cognitive functions, but the underlying mechanisms have remained obscure. Animal studies demonstrated, however, that neuronal EPO effects are independent of an elevated hematocrit. Here, we show with a novel line of reporter mice that cognitive challenge leads to local/endogenous hypoxia in hippocampal pyramidal neurons where it induces enhanced expression of both EPO and EPO receptor (EPOR). High-dose EPO administration, which amplifies auto/paracrine EPO/EPOR signaling, prompts the emergence of new CA1 neurons and enhanced dendritic spine densities. Single cell sequencing reveals rapid increase in newly differentiating neurons. Importantly, improved performance on complex running wheels after EPO treatment is imitated by exposure to mild exogenous/inspiratory hypoxia. All these effects depend on neuronal expression of the Epor gene. Taken together, this suggests a novel cellular model of neuroplasticity in which neuronal networks, challenged by cognitive tasks, drift into transient hypoxia which becomes a trigger of neuronal EPO/EPOR expression. This regulatory circle causes long-lasting neuroplastic adaptation, and as fundamental cellular mechanism, may be relevant for strategies aiming at cognitive improvement.
